And so we've got a full course
website here, it's got these slides,
it's got links to all the reboos we're
gonna be using, it's got all of my notes.
It's got extra content that we
could tap into if we need to, or
you can kind of use as
an extension in a little bit.
But this is where everything that I say
hopefully if all goes according to plan.
Everything I say is listed here as well
that you can refer to and build upon.
So we'll head over there and
we'll actually get started
with our very first, Vite app.
What we're gonna do in the very beginning
is I have one repo in here that is
called Vite starter.
And, there's nothing particularly
special in this repo it's just
mostly if we wanna show how to
load an image or pull in JSON or
process markdown that happens to be
a repo that has some images in it.
Has the mark down files,
has some JSON files has,
some tests written some helper functions
that we can pull in, but it's just yeah.
It's just a bunch,
it's a basically a toy chest full of fun
things that we can kinda play around with.
So you can kinda go here and
grab this vite-starter,
there's a bunch of ways
that you can clone it down.
There's a tool that's super useful
called div git which will kind of clone
down the repo, And
actually keep that one up and running.
So I've got a copy of vite-starter in
here, and let's just take a quick tour.
Really, all that you truly need to get
started with Vite is exactly two things,
you need to NPM install Vite and
you need an index.html file.
Once you have those two things, if those
are only the only things you have in this
directory, you would be good to go, in
terms of starting with the Vite project,
I guess maybe you need to package JSON to.
But like, so NPM and knit dash dash
yes and then NPM install Vite,
and touch index.html,
that's about all you need to get started,
there's not a lot of configuration.
In fact, for the like first few sections,
I don't have a configuration file at all,
right?
We're just going to do what Vite does for
us out of the box, and we're not going to
like worry about configuring it in
the very beginning, we will configure it.
That'll be what we spent a lot of
our time together doing today, but
we're gonna see how easy
it is to get started.
And then as we dive deep
into how powerful it is,
that's when we'll see all the different
ways that we can configure it.
So we'll go ahead here and if I look at my
package, JSON, you got a few ways you can
start up this application, as you can see,
there's NPM, start and NPM run dev.
This is a common pattern that you'll
see in a lot of Vite apps, but
a lot of apps because if you're
using something PM, PM or
something that supports mono repos, right?
That will then start all the packages all
at once and apply across all of them.
For us, we really don't care.
So if you like NPM start great,
if you like NPM run dev, very cool.
To build the application,
it's just going we yeah,
we can choose to run the TypeScript
checker, if you're just using
JavaScript really all you need is
vite build, so on and so forth.
So I could for instance,
type make that a little
bit bigger npx vite and
that will start up my server.
I can do npm run dev, that'll start it up,
I can do npm start let's do that one.
And you can see that it starts up a
development server and a few options here.
One is that the default port is 5173,
why is that number?
I have no idea.
If you don't like that you can do --
port 3,333 whatever port
makes you the happiest.
You can also set that in the configuration
later if you really don't have this port
number you don't feel like
you'll ever remember it.
I'll give you a hint,
mine's set to 3,000 at work.
So you can also do the -- host to
expose it locally on the network
in case you wanna pull out your phone and
go visit your site on the network and
then see what it actually looks
like on a physical device.
But for the most part,
we can kind of just go to this site,
and you see my beautiful page.
Right now there's no JavaScript,
there's no CSS, there is,
I guess, some amount of HTML for
a counter,
that doesn't work because
there's no JavaScript or CSS.
And we're gonna add a few things to it.
And if I look,
like I said before, right now,
you can start with just
the index.html file.
A package JSON with vite in fact,
if you haven't installed globally,
I guess you don't even
need the package JSON,
you can just do it with index.html
file in the same folder.
And that's effectively all
you need to get started.
Now, that doesn't do a lot for us, but in
terms of like my promise that like there's
not a lot of configuration and
boilerplate that you need to do in order
to get started,
I have at least kept that promise to you.
And so we'll talk about now how to kind
of build it and extend on it from there.
So, you know, there's right now nothing's
just a plain old regular HTML document,
there was nothing special in here at all.
I could we don't need service workers,
we can just say something like console.log
and like nothing like everything
you expect is gonna start this way,
but let's go ahead and
get a sense of it real quick.
There's to no one's surprise we log
something to the console, right?
What would be cool, though,
is if we could import a file, right?
I could, for instance,
I can go into this index.js,
and I could say something like
console.log, hello from index.js.
And just for funsies,
I'm going to do a document.,
let's do query selector,
go get me an h1 and
let's set the text content to
hello from index.js as well.
This is gonna blow up,
we're gonna fix it, it's gonna blow up.
So we can go back over, we didn't import
here, so let's go back into index.html.
And the first thing I can try
to do is that I can just do src.
Now, you'll notice that I'm using a local,
am not using from the public directly,
am actually just referencing
a file on my file system, right?
Like relative to where this
index.html is in my repo, and
that's not normally what you
would do on this first file.
You'd be like, okay, when it's built,
it's gonna be in disk, or
it's gonna be at the root, or what have
you, and it's all gonna be in there.
Actually, for us right now,
we can actually reference a local file.
And now it should blow up,
can't set text context of no,
and that is because it
loads before the h1.
But that's not really our
big problem right now,
it's just a problem that exists
temporarily at this moment.
Which is, it would be cool then if I
could I've got this counter file here and
that's got some logic in it that wires up
everything I need for the counter, right?
What would be nice is if I could just say,
okay, cool,
I want to import, I think it's
initialized counter from counter, right?
And you'll see that blows up in
a different way can now use the import
statement outside of a module?
All right, right on.
So the only thing that we really need
to do here in order to get everything
working the way that we want to watch,
you're ready for it?
type = "module", and the nice part
about this is this is not a vite
specific thing,
this is just the modern web.
A lot of what we're doing is
we're just going to assume
that the modern web exists in everything,
Mark.
>> We also don't have an h1
>> We have an h2 See what
happens when I change stuff,
here we'll change it to an h2.
Cool, and you can see it found it.
Now, if I take out that module, module
actually waits till the very end to load,
so the DOM content will be loaded as
deferred, so you get the original content.
Let's take out the module and we'll see.
This is what happens when you
try to mark up from memory.
Right on and you can see it blows up,
e add the module.
Two things happen, one, it loads
after the DOM originally loads, and
then two we can now use we
can import whatever we want.
We can go initializeCounter, and
we can use these import statements and
everything just happens.
And that is honestly the only vite
specific thing that we did in this
entire file to get up and running in
the very beginning was using a local,
just a relative file path to
the actual files that we're working on.
And not necessarily where the initial
the build will eventually be.
Beyond that, there's no theoretically,
no needed entry point that
we needed to specify,
nothing the index.html file is the entry
point just like it would be on the web.
And everything kind of works and
is wired up from there.
And that is out of the box the only
thing that we needed to do to
get vite working at all.
And so we have the ability to like
pull stuff in we've got it in place,
we know that it loads afterwards.
Now let's take a look at what the
production build will end up looking like.
So we'll do npm run build, and
it's gonna build everything
into this dist folder here.
We can see it took everything in my
public directory which is favicons and
icons and stuff along those lines.
And it went ahead and
it built an index.html that is effectively
the exact same code except for the instead
of that relative path it swapped it
in with a built version of my assets.
Which also put a little identifier at the
end so that we deployed to production and
somebody has cache headers set
that this is a different URL.
So they will not get the one cache they'll
get the new JavaScript in this case as
well even if they have the browser
was gonna otherwise try to cache it.
But that is the only change that
VITE really did to our HTML file
it will actually look that you can
do all sorts of stuff in here and
we'll see some of that towards the end but
you know for now like.
Effectively, as long as you've
got an index.html file, and
you can reference the JavaScript file,
you're configured and you're ready to go.
We can go and we can see,
for instance, in assets,
I've got that index.js, and
there's lots of stuff in this directory.
And you'll notice that none of that is
in this assets folder all we've got this
index I'm pretty sure if I hit save
prettier will do its best to unmodified
that slightly.
Which there's some code in here for
actually that preloading that we're
talking about and
the changes based on the script tags.
But other than that,
it's simply our code compiled and
you can see parts of it that we have
in there, all thrown together for us.
So, outta the box we didn't have to set up
any configuration, we didn't have to do
anything, we could get up and running
with a new idea incredibly quickly.
I think that's very powerful and like I
said, it wired up all our static assets
for us, it swapped out that file with what
we actually needed, so on and so forth.
And generally speaking,
if you have just one script tag,
it will go ahead and
just make you one file.
And if I imported something,
you can see that I have one file,
we went to index.js, index.js imported,
that counter, right?
But it's all one file because these like,
well, if I get this one dynamically and
then you instantly need the next one
directly and not asynchronous or
anything like that.
I should just bundle them together instead
of making two HTTP requests, right?
Like even with HTTP 2, where we think we
can like parallelize a bunch of stuff,
like not making requests is
better than making requests.
And in this case, the file is so
small bundling it all together
will make it easier for
us to get everything than to try to make
two requests for two different files.
We'll even see a little bit later
that like if you have images or
something along those lines and it's small
enough added things that can inline them,
it will just inline them, trying to
save as many requests as possible and
like other than us looking at it together,
like you will get it for free.
And I'll show you how to like, opt in or
out of it, as well, but like a lot of this
stuff will just happen for you with
very little, configuration on your end.
Now, we could do some additional things
here if we wanna just kind of see how
vite works.
If you're only rendering one page,
you probably need most of the JavaScript
and/or CSS that we haven't added yet.
But if you're building a single-page
application that has some amount of
client-side router, you know that
unless you go that client-side route.
You don't need the modules for that route
until they navigate there, or a lot of
times you can preload and stuff like
that that a framework will handle, Mark.
>> Does it depend on the size of
the script or it always happens?
Like if it knows that it needs it,
it will most likely,
there's probably an upper bound.
But generally speaking,
it will go ahead and
try to tree shake as much as possible and
make one file unless we figure out
ways to then basically through like
asynchronous loading of additional files.
Whether that's through a router or
about to do it by hand, right?
There's probably an upper bound, but
generally speaking, I haven't seen it.